---
layout: post
title: Unknowable
author: Chris Carter
published: false
categories: articles
---

Ever since I was a little boy, the workings of the world have intrigued and fascinated me. I was an observant and contemplative child, and often found myself pondering the way that things worked. Growing up on a small farm in rural Vermont left me with little else to do. I would often go explore the small creek in front of the house to observe and manipulate the dynamics of the water, or I would ponder the physical and chemical explanation for the color and shape of the flames of a campfire. Or, I might just watch the clouds and measure the wind, and dwell on why certain weather systems never seemed to reach the house from certain directions, or why the wind always blew in a regular direction at certain time of day during a certain season. I was a curious boy, and I’m still very curious as a man; I often add cream to my hot coffee without stirring it, just to watch how the cream dances and swirls to the unheard music of convection and fluid mechanics.

This natural curiosity fueled a lot of my educational ambition. I was always intrigued with the subject I knew the least about at the time. When I was young, I wanted to explain the ways things moved and interacted, so I delved into the study of physics, calculus, and engineering. Then I got a little older, and chemistry and biology became the locus of my curiosity, so I devoted my time to the study of reactions and molecular conformations. College was the height of my scientific education, as I studied mathematics. This gave me ample time to investigate mathematical logic, mathematical modeling, physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, computer science, and probability theory. These days, rhetoric, prose, and poetry are where I find my curiosity diligently observing, and quietly experimenting.

Mathematics was a natural choice for me. I displayed great aptitude in mathematics from a young age, and the ubiquity of mathematics in the sciences I was interested in complimented my intrinsic desire to understand the world. If I was curious about something, I would do some research on how it worked, and eventually come upon a mathematical equation or principle which explained, at least in part, how the thing worked. That is classically what mathematics means: knowledge, study, learning. It is the foundation of all other sources of scientific knowledge, and therefore my education was not just an avenue for me to study math itself, rather, it was an opportunity to engage in research about a myriad of sciences. It was an amazing opportunity.

During my education I learned a lot of scientific theory, and quite a lot of mathematics to compliment it, but more importantly I came to understand how science is done, and the nature of the conclusions which are made in the sciences. As a scientist matures, they understand more deeply how little they know; each fact they collect into their corpus of knowledge seems to bring more darkness to their understanding of the world than illumination. As each question is answered, three more questions are raised, especially if the answer explains why something must be, or how it functions. An explanation to a “why?” or “how?” requires a framework within which you allow a certain set of facts to be true; you can explain why someone fell on the ice very easily by invoking the reality of the slipperiness of ice, but this only raises the question of why ice is slippery in the first place. A scientist is, at least in part, someone who is not content with the first explanation they are given as to some aspect of the mysterious realm they live in.

For the sake of discussion, I posit that Nature has a twofold function. Its first function is to be comprehended: man in his reason is able to deduce the existence of the Laws of Nature. From the fact that Nature behaves a certain way, he deduces by his reason that there must be some ordering principles by which all of Nature functions. Though he cannot perceive the Laws themselves, he is able to deduce their approximations from hypothesis, experiment, and inference. The discovery of the Laws of Nature is the purpose of scientific investigation.  The apparent order that all created things exhibit impresses upon a man that he, as a created being, must have a Law himself that governs the way which he ought to act. More importantly, he must deduce that both the Laws of Nature and the Law of Man were written by a transcendent Lawgiver who must be outside all that functions according to Law. When we comprehend Nature, in part we comprehend God, transcendent and imminent. He is transcendent, in that the Laws that He wrote are above all creation, just as He is above all creation, incomprehensible of Himself if it were not for creation. By a similar line of reasoning He is imminent, present at every moment and in every event in the unfolding of creation as a whole, just as a writer is present at every moment in his or her work. Both facts culminate to man a few undeniable maxims: God exists, God is glorious, God is a Lawgiver, I am under Law, I am Lawless.  

# practical mystery
Nature's second function is its dual, and is the one of primary concern with respect to this discussion. Just as the sciences inform with knowledge, they affront us with ignorance, confusion, and humility. Observation of the world and its complexity and beauty impresses upon the mind a sense of the incomprehensibility of Nature, in proportion to how much is known about Nature. Through this the imminence and transcendence of God are revealed in more subtle and more infrequently discussed ways. A brief survey of modern astronomy for example, will reveal that even the parts of Universe which can be observed with telescopes comprise a far more vast expanse of space and time than the human race could ever hope to explore in thousands of generations; we inhabit small planet on the boundary of a large galaxy which is imbedded in an overwhelmingly huge supercluster of galaxies, each with millions of solar systems similar to ours. Modern physics, chemistry, and biology have similar conundrums which have arisen as a result of more data collection on the Natural world; physics has yet to come to a consensus on the nature of quantum phenomena, and biochemistry long ago discovered enzymes which behave better than they should be thermodynamically allowed to. A deeper practical understanding of Nature does not simplify it. Confusion is the residence of the scientist, but to the layman, all things are as they appear. Thus God, in His wonder and complexity, has made Creation wonderfully complex and mysterious, even to those who devote their lives to its study.

# metaphysical? mystery - why does the universe seem incomplete?
Yet for all of its wonder, the Universe does not often seem complete to us. We might say that Nature is harsh, or cruel, or

# total mystery - there are truths which we cannot know
But there is a deeper incomprehensibility still. We have spoken thus far of _practical_ incomprehensibility; incomprehensibility due to the nature of human intelligence, which is a flawed and limited system of epistemology. There is simply too much to learn and remember within the span of one human life, not to mention the fact that life is not always optimally conducive to learning. There is such a thing as _total incomprehensibility_ in the sciences as well, namely, in the science of mathematics. Math is a system of deduction from axioms.


We already understand God to be the author and sustainer of all of Nature, but when we realize the vastness of the whole show we get a very different picture of God indeed.

He traverses it as a foreigner, wanton and homesick.
