---
layout: post
title: "Cain and Abel: An Uncomfortable Constraint on the Theory of Government"
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-05-07T14:15:17.949Z
categories: articles
---
Once we have collectively established as a society that God does not exist, then it is not hard to land the little skip from objectivism to subjectivism. There is no God, so say and do as you please; there is no God, so truth is what we make it, and you are free to believe "your truth", whatever it happens to be; there is no God, so there are no "God-given" inalienable rights; there is no God, so there need be no distinction between "male" or "female" or any other denomination of gender, if it is not convenient to us. Subjectivism poisons the framework upon which the values and norms of a society are built, manifesting first in an irreverence for God, and then in sexual deviance and promiscuity, and finally in the total loss of the soundnes sof mind. This progression unfolds first at the social level among very few, and from its origin it unwinds like a thread, masquerading first politically as a matter of "rights", and later as a matter of civil dogma which shall not be blasphemed against. Subjectivism has proven to be gasoline on the fire which was started by the progressives in the early parts of the century; the perspective that Constitutional rights are a prescriptive enumeration of acceptable behavior for the citizens to partake of, instead of a set of axioms which limit the powers of government for the preservation of liberty, is progressivism at its core. If there is no God, and rights are endowed to the people by the government instead of by God, and if constitutional laws mean only what they are interpreted to mean, and if they are found to be inconvenient in specific circumstances, and if they have their ontological origin in the canonization of the constitution by the hands of men, then they may be misinterpreted, overruled, or uncanonized by the hands of men just as easily. A democratic republic only has to have enough hands to make the amendments.

Without a framework which enumerates lawful and unlawful behavior, we are doomed to wander aimlessly in an ethical vacuum. We would rather gravitate to any ethic at all than to hold to none. The entire history of politics, driven by this engine of vacuum, is a sequence of arguments about what is right and what is wrong, arguments which burn the fires of conflict that turn the wheels of policy and revolution which, in turn, drive the axle which builds and destroys civilizations. Almost no one agrees on what is right and what is wrong, but almost everyone agrees, by their actions and impulses at least, that there is such a thing as right and wrong. Godly people do not bother with much deliberation of what the particular semantics of right and wrong are, and choose, rather, to discuss the proper application of those moral maxims which have been engraved in God's word with indelible ink to matters of ethics and civil policy. The careful secularist has a much harder task, as they must engineer their own morality from first principles before they can even consider matters of ethics or policy. There is no other place for it to lie, and the secular are glad for the the moral law of society to be administered to them by government officials in order to fill the great chasm of lawlessness which every man has dug out of his own chest; a chasm meant to be filled over and pressed down firmly with the aggregate of God's Law. Man's desire to be ruled by other men is so strong that even the Israelites, who lived in the presence of God and were guided by His every decree, begged for a human king. 

At this point the secularist may proudly interject, noting the dissent in my semantics, that mankind's strong desire for human governance is not necessarily a vice. After all, provided we have a competent means of vetting individuals who can participate in the workings of government, we simply have to take care only to elect the best politicians to power: those who represent the people best will rule them as one sympathetic to their true needs. If God does not exist, then the civil magistrate does not need to concern themselves with their God-given responsibility of legislation and execution of laws according to what is true, and what is in accordance with God's prescription of righteousness and evil; they merely need to concern themselves with appeasing the masses, or doing as they see fit themselves. Likewise, a secular judge does not need to concern themselves with judging and sentencing according to the wisdom and objectivism of the Righteous Judge who has granted them the privilege of emulating Him, they need only to worry about "interpreting" the law in order to appease the masses, or to provide legal precedence for their own agenda. The secular magistrate has no transcendent power to answer to, and if they seek to do as they please, they must only quell the dissent of the masses and their fellow magistrates, whose ungrounded wills and opinions may be easily manipulated by appeals first to desire, and then to the propagandized the "new normal", and then to majority rule.

For these reasons C.S. Lewis was right to call subjectivism, an inherent component of secularism, a poison. It is a toxin which, when administered, rots the skeleton of society. We must now characterize the conditions for its administration. Though many philosophers throughout history have made it their mission to engineer principles that moral and epistemological truths may find some stable footing upon in the absence of God, such as Epicureanism and Stoicism, Ayn Rand's Objectivism, Kant's Categorical Imperative, and so on. These attempts, while noble, hold as axiomatic that mankind wants to behave reasonably all the time; as if the only thing standing in the way of utopian human behavior is that we haven't crunched down the right principles of morality. Why should we assume that people are rational at all, much less that they want to behave rationally? Better yet, in a secular sense, what moral imperative is there to behave rationally? What does rationality even mean, and how could you deduce what it means without a foundation of deductive algebra? Those who find success in influencing others do not appeal to their rationality, understanding what Christians already know: that mankind is a passionate creature before he is a rational one; he thinks firstly with his belly and secondarily with his mind. 

All of secularism is doomed to fail; no matter the complexity of its treaties, the stability of its economies, the nobility of its philosophies, the duration of its traditions, the foundation of secular society rests upon agreements made between depraved men that are predicated on principles engineered by depraved men. Just as that which is made by the hands and will of man has an origin in time, so that which was even created even with utmost cleverness will have an eventual termination in time. The churn of the events of history is driven, in part, by the entropic reactions of matter in time: storms, plagues, natural disasters, and all the other effects of the amoral world. An analysis of the events of history must always take these things into account: the so-called "real" effects referenced by economists. The other reactions are driven as the result of parties conspiring with or warring against other parties, towards the accomplishment of the desired agenda. Mankind is not content with the quiet governance of God over all of life, for the vices of sin cause him to quest insatiably for political change, social revolution, and sensual satisfaction. Man cannot live his life satisfied with what God has given him, but takes every opportunity to leverage his existing circumstances for selfish gain. We are, by our very nature, so thoroughly opposed to the tranquil government of God's providence, that we will go to profoundly extreme injustice to accomplish our own will. "God's world is unfit, God is unfit, and His tyranny is keeping us from the true freedom we could have!". That is the collective manifesto of mankind, and because of it, the blood of our brothers cries out from the ground. 

To those nations who acknowledge God in truth, to them He grants soundness of mind, and a soul which conforms to His will over theirs. For the great majority of the masses to be repentant, and for them to deny their own sinful wills, and for the Gospel to be exalted in the pulpit and in the public square, that is what it means for a nation to be Christian. Such a nation is awakened to their sorry state before God, and falls before Him in sackcloth and ashes to receive the forgiveness and grace which is in Jesus Christ. Such a nation honors Him as King, from the lowest peasant to the highest civil magistrate, and both conduct their lives in the context of His grace and His wrath. To those who deny God, their end is a depraved mind, a mind which does not acknowledge Him as King, nor have any regard for truth or righteousness. Watch the skies, like a man who tends the land, or a man who navigates the sea: when the intelligence of the nation fades to madness, and lies are preferred to the truth, and sexual promiscuity abounds, and heresy is preached from the pulpit, and men marry men, and babies are killed in the womb, and the freedoms of the citizens are slowly erased from their Constitution, you are right to conclude that the nation has fallen under God's judgement. This is the secular nation, ruled by the deviant and sinful desires of men, with no checks and balances, and no objective accountability to anyone other than whoever holds the keys of political power at that time. 

We might be tempted to think that such a nation would be restored through the acquisition and the exercise of political power by a small part of usurpers, as the Groypers under Nick Fuentes have attempted to do. Or, perhaps we would be tempted to remove ourselves from politics at all, as most of the evangelical church has chosen to do, and direct our energies elsewhere. Both are unequivocally the wrong response. The first is a flawed approach, and might I add, quite a Roman Catholic response to the problem of secularism. One only needs to examine the history of the Catholics breifly to discover that despicable men have risen to the ranks of Pope and Bishop with ease, and executed deprave actions while they represented the Roman Church. It is one thing to elect a wolf, it is another to elect a sheep who will be torn apart by the other wolves, and another entirely elect a severely vicious wolf who looks like a sheep.