---
layout: post
title: On Closing Churches
author: Chris Carter
---

A lot of men who are far more articulate than I have said what needs to be said about closing churches due to COVID-19. And honestly, I'm sick of talking about it, but my church just closed its doors again, and I'll be saying a lot of the same thing to people over the next few weeks. So, I might as well write it down.

My friend Rich has written <a href="http://coffeenoatmeal.com/regarding-covid-19-closing-churches/" target="_blank">an excellent exposition</a> of the interplay of the church and the State with respect to church closure during the pandemic. He cites his sources well.  

The gathering of believers to worship of the Triune God of Scripture is a non-negotiable. Christians are called not to forsake gathering together, because gathering together is one of the primary means by which believers are sanctified. We are not to forsake it (i.e. to completely abandon it forever) _because_ there is nothing which can replace gathering in person to pray, sing spiritual songs, and hear the preaching of the word of God. Nothing. Especially when dealing with a disease with a 99.92% survival rate. For context, Luther kept his church open when the bubonic plague made a visit to Wittenberg in 1527, a disease with a survival rate of anywhere from 70% to just 10%, because he understood that Christians are not people who fear death, but who rather have overcome it because of Christ. Being convinced that the spiritual health of his parish was of far higher importance than a mere, uncertain, and ultimately temporary extension of their physical preservation, he kept his church open to preach the word of God from the pulpit. I concur with Luther: my pastor's job is not to keep me from getting sick, nor is his job to keep me happy; his job is to preach the Gospel from the pulpit.

According to Scripture, the way infectious disease should be managed in a community is by isolation and quarantine of those who are symptomatically sick (Leviticus 13-14). According to Scripture, the purpose of civil government is to reward those who do good, and be a terror to those who do evil (Romans 13, 1 Peter 2). And according to Scripture, the purpose of the church is to serve the Living King by preaching the Gospel to all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Triune God, _teaching them to obey all that Christ has commanded us_ (Matthew 28:18-20). What we have in this situation is a threefold disobedience of Scripture: our civil government isolates and quarantines the healthy, fines them obscene fees for breaking their stringent regulations, and has well overstepped its God-given role to be a bearer of the sword for the sake of God's justice. Furthermore, the Christian church is silent on this. How are we to bring the nations into obedience to Christ, if we are unwilling to teach against these overreaches of government? Who is going to teach Andrew Cuomo or Gavin Newsom what the purpose of the civil magisterium _is_ according to God, if not a bold and boisterous church who heralds the Law and Grace of the Triune God?

This, to me, is the crux of the issue with church shutdowns. America's perception of Evangelicals and Evangelicalism as a whole is largely that we are a group of limp-wristed, soft spoken, superstitious people, with mild and inconsistent convictions, who occasionally speak in tongues. Granted, we aren't all like that, but by and large our reputations are too good and our convictions aren't true enough to be offensive to the world. Trump supporters are more hated than Christians are, because Trump supporters are willing to draw the hard line on some issues. The Law of God is the Law for all of life, and the Gospel is a Gospel for all of life. The Bible, almost invariably, has something to say about all human endeavors and situations, from race relations, medicine, economics, and politics, to sex, engineering, and building safety codes. All of life is under the authority of the Gospel, but Evangelicals just don't believe that. We aren't salty enough. To say, "we are shutting down our church because we don't want to be part of the problem" is to fail to see that the church is the only solution. Gathering to sanctify one another in mutual worship of the Triune God is never a part of the problem; it doesn't matter what the problem is. Why? Because the real problem is that we live in a world filled with people who defy, blaspheme, and spit towards King Jesus even now, just as they did when He was venerated with mockery, robed with lashes, crowned with thorns, and enthroned upon a cross. It is my conviction that He must be worshiped, even when it is not convenient or safe or legal for us to do so.

In all this, there is a time to be shrewd. A large church, like mine, could face some hefty fines and penalties for openly rebelling against a government as disobedient as the one governing New York State, and the church could be shut down indefinitely for such actions. I get it; it's a bad idea to charge into an open field when you don't even have anyone to cover your six. The art of war dictates a more calculated approach, and one which the Church has adopted from the time of Christ: guerilla warfare, not with guns or with violence, but instead with underground gathering and preaching of the Gospel. Be wise as serpents, and as innocent as doves. A statement like, "Our civil government requires us to stop gathering to worship the Triune God, but we know that isn't an option. We understand that gathering to worship King Jesus is never a part of the problem. Thus, we will be shrewd, and raise up trusted men to preach the Gospel in homes and in small groups that we may continue to meet together and worship Him" communicates to the church and to the world the conviction that Christ is King, and that we intend to worship Him no matter what, and we intend for now to avoid becoming the beneficiaries of an overstretched civil government. Such a statement would rally the troops. It would give Christian men in the church the chance to get behind their pastor and join the fight for a worthy cause. So many of the young men I've talked to have had their consciences pricked by the discrepancies I have noted in this article, and are _dying_ to get behind someone who takes a stand. I'm right there with them...that's part of the reason I started this blog. To many of us, a church shutdown appears to be a full-blown retreat, even if it's actually not. War strategists and superior officers must make it clear to their soldiers what exactly a pause in the action is; are we laying down arms and surrendering, _or_ have the means of the mission merely changed from infantry to special operations?

Such communication would be mutually beneficial; the laymen know the plan and back their pastor, and their pastor knows of the men who are willing to stand with him. As I've said before, I don't envy pastors for their responsibility to shepherd the flock of God. What I want to do is encourage them to take a stand, and that if they do, that I will back them. What we do when we gather together to worship God truly is spiritual warfare. The wheels of history are driven from the pulpit, and that cause, the cause of making all things new through the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is worth dying for.
