---
layout: post
title: Utopia
author: Chris Carter
tags: [The Benedictine Diaries]
published: false
---

A quick _pensé_ for you. I've got a bit of a headache, but I should write anyway.

We are conditioned to conceive of "utopia" as the place where the Jetsons live: a flashy city, where everyone lives on the 30th floor, wears a spacesuit, commutes in a flying car, does household chores using their own personal AI, works from home, and uses a bidet. The funny thing about this kind of utopia is that it's a place where most people don't really want to live. We know this, because they basically live there now, and they don't like it very much.

The visionaries who invented social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter imagined a world where people could be connected socially without being physically present in a group. Even a cynical skeptic of worldly maneuvers like me isn't willing to think that Mark Zuckerberg created Facebook so he could have his own personal platform to censor what people said. He was a college kid who made a "hot or not" website that morphed into the world's most popular social media company. It was intended to be a fun thing, although probably not the sort of fun I would have participated in originally. Now, Rasmussen reports that 61% of people think social media is bad for politics. Anecdotally, I think people are starting to get sick of social media. It turns out people aren't really fans of the type of communication that was previously considered "utopic".

In my estimation, as a guy who increasingly becomes convinced of an optimistic eschatology, the idea of utopia needs some reformation. We must do away with the idea that a utopia will be brought about by _technological_ means, and embrace the fact that the only solid foundation for anything close to a good world is a _moral_ means. Those who want to usher in such a reformation have no choice but to be theonomists, because theonomists are the only ones who have a clear grasp of what human flourishing actually is; God's Law in the book of Leviticus is prescriptive of that.

If I may opine, I think a real utopia would be more rural and more simple than we would naturally guess.
