---
layout: post
title: Suppose It's Not All Going to Come Crashing Down Just Yet
author: Chris Carter
image: /assets/img/city2.JPG
---

Suppose for a moment, as a thought experiment, that the popular American Evangelical pessimistic eschatology is wrong. In other words, suppose that it's not all going to get worse and worse until the Day of the Lord. Instead, take history in 500 year chunks, and suppose that each chunk shows a relative improvement in life on Earth, where "improvement" means more Christians, more Christian living, and more Christianization across the whole planet. Suppose that the work of the Church has just started, and isn't soon to end. Humor me.

How would that change your behavior _today_? How would it change your plans?

If you're naïve enough to say, "it wouldn't at all", then go build a stone wall. Firstly, because you probably need the character. But secondly, because there's a valuable lesson to learn in building a stone wall. Growing up in Vermont as a kid, I used to play in the woods all the time. Vermont is incredibly rural and fairly old, so a lot of old boundaries, foundations, stone walls, and other evidences of past generations are everywhere. You'll stumble upon them as you walk through the woods; an old foundation over there, a stone wall running all the way from the creek around the boundary of this flat spot here, an old road over there. Somebody you never knew built those things, sometimes hundreds of years ago, and their work left a lasting impression on the world you now occupy. Stone walls last a long time, and that means the things _you_ do are going to last a long time too.

Now of course, I affirm wholeheartedly that Jesus is going to come back to judge the living and the dead, to reunite Heaven and Earth, to make all things new. This world be made new, from top to bottom; nothing of the curse of sin will remain when God is done writing the end of the story. The question is, how do you read the signs of the times? If you read them, as many Evangelicals do, that the end times are imminent especially in light of political events, you are less likely to take the risks you are expected to take for effective ministry. If you _really_ believed, for example, that the stock market was just _due_ to crash in the next three months, you'd call your retirement broker immediately and liquidate your 401(k), open a TD Ameritrade account, short the S&P 500, buy canned food, toilet paper, and guns, and hunker down in your basement expecting the imminent collapse of capitalism. If you expected the opposite, you might just sit around, maybe quit your job, buy up a bunch of stocks, and wait for the dividends to roll in until you were so rich you'd make King Solomon blush. What we believe about the future affects what we do now, and the kicker is that what we do now affects the future. Most Evangelicals are in a holding pattern, just waiting for _something_ to happen, because they read the times to mean the end is nigh.

If you read the events of today as a small negative blip in an overall story of grad success, you'll act differently. You'll be sure to build some excellent quality stone walls. You'll see the 5-decade downturn of moral conscience in the United States as an opportunity to go to war on forces of darkness, and to make real progress in the next 10 decades of history by preaching the Gospel _today_. The foundations you lay in all facets of life today will, by grace alone, be used by your children, your grandchildren, and your nth-generation grandchildren, as platforms upon which to stand and bulwarks behind which to hide. They will see greater victory than you will.

What could be more motivating than knowing that our work as Christians matters, and that the war is already ours, and that there is plenty of ground to cover?  
