---
layout: post
author: Chris Carter
title: The Transient State of Things
published: false
date: 2020-04-08T01:59:23.785Z
---
Crisis affronts our minds with the striking brittleness of our lives. In a matter of weeks, life as we knew it has almost vanished for fear of infectious disease. Thousands have succumbed to infection, schools have been closed, events have canceled, businesses are hanging on by a thread. Amid the uncertainty of the future extent of these infections, and the certainty of the three years of economic progress which have been essentially reversed in a matter of weeks, it is the recommendation of government officials in many nations for citizens to huddle in their homes like cowering sheep until the wave of contagion passes. Whether this is actually an emergency with risk as grand an dire as the narrative proclaims, or whether this is all a great social experiment, it is certainly a great enlightenment of human behavior. Concern and action would be unwise, but the scale and extent of both ought to be under more scrutiny. Where is the dissenting American spirit in the populace? Why are we so amiable to comply? That's a topic for another time, I suppose.

In times of calamity I find myself pondering not how things have gone so horribly wrong, but how things seemed to remain stable for the great duration of serenity leading up to the calamity. The last time that infectious disease brought about a comparable amount of havoc to this one was in 1918 with the spread of the Spanish Flu over a century ago. Even then, the epidemiological effect now is not nearly what it was in that time. It is not possible for human life to be a steady traversal of a harmonious Rousseauian paradise. Infectious disease, accident, catastrophe, war, death, and other fruit of fallenness are always present at every moment in latent form, sometimes kept at bay by human ingenuity, and sometimes kept at bay by simple luck. At the limits of both, we experience the invocation of Stein's Law: "if something cannot go on forever, it will stop".

We would be tempted to believe that the interference of calamity in daily life can be mitigated by the acquisition of knowledge, in order to plan for what has already happened, to predict what will happen, to provide ingenuity regarding these predictions, and the proper implementation of that ingenuity. To any Westerner, the acquisition of knowledge as a salvific endeavor is axiomatic, and on this axiom, the student, the scientist, the philosopher, and the technologist kindle enough hope to trudge forward on their blind march of progress into the future. There is no time to ask "should we?", much less, time to ask "is there any value to this?"; seconds spared to questions which are inconsistent with the axioms are seconds which could have been spent developing benevolent AI, or building a rocket to Mars, or finding a way to cure AIDS, or refining a postmodern dialectic.

There was no man who knew more in his time than the Teacher, the writer of the book of Ecclesiastes. Likely, this man was King of Israel, and on account of the life he describes in the autobiographical introduction to the book authorship is often attributed to King Solomon himself. Explicit authorship is excluded from the text to highlight the timeless nature of truths which could have been spoken by knowledgeable and wise men, the most prominent being "vanity of vanities", a comment on all human endeavors. The book drives this point with a sledgehammer. Ecclesiastes is an urging from God to look within, and consider the great existential dread which is He has placed within all those who have turned their backs upon Him. It is the same dread which was felt by the congregants who were within earshot of Jonathan Edwards' infamous *Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God*, a simple exposition of God's wrath, preached to convey the striking peril of eternal judgement which awaits men at every moment of their lives, as if every person was like a spider hanging from a brittle strand of web above a roaring campfire.

To those who are in God because of Christ, calamity is a reminder of the transience of life, that this world is not our home, and that a better world awaits us in the coming millennia. To those who are not, calamity of any sort is a grave warning of things to come: restless change, until the Changeless One appears to signify the end of days. No amount of knowledge will halt the decay to which the Universe is bound, driven by the engine of entropy, nor will cleverly built infrastructure postpone the return of Christ.