---
layout: post
title: No Fear 2021
author: Chris Carter
---

I was fortunate enough during my brief stint on dating apps to meet a nice girl from Canada. We had a lot of great conversations about politics and theology and whatnot, and seemed to connect on a lot of shared values, but unfortunately decided that the wisest thing to do was to not take our relationship further than the friendship we had developed online. A six hour drive to another country isn't exactly "the girl next door", and as well, she wasn't really keen on moving to the United States especially with all of the turmoil our nation is experiencing politically, socially, epidemiologically, economically, and so on. I'm pretty sure she said "ya no way" or something.

I probably could have found a better way to introduce that point.

<p class="title is-5" style="margin: 0 0 0.5em">State of the Union: Panic</p>

AD Robles coined #NoDespair2020, so I have to give credit where credit is due. In fact, I believe he coined it before the whole outbreak was expected to become a pandemic. The reason is simple: there is no room for despair, because Christ reigns over all of creation. "All authority in Heaven and on Earth has been given to me," says He. He is King of the whole Universe. Donald Trump, Nancy Pelosi, Andrew Cuomo, Vladimir Putin, Justin Trudeau, Xi Jinping, whoever becomes president of the United States in November, and anyone else who participates in the governance of the nations (that includes _you_, dear voter), must refrain from acting in their own autonomy, but instead must answer to King Jesus Christ in Heaven as _the_ supreme authority over all of life. Render to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is God's; Caesar gets your taxes, and Jesus gets everything. Not everything else, but _everything_.

In the span of 10 months and 2 days, we have seen the outbreak of a novel asymmetric flu-like virus which has killed thousands, massive government overreach, massive government incompetence, race war skirmishes, critical race theory becoming a household name, presidential debates that rival WWE smackdowns, and the infamous Chinese superbug infecting the executive himself. Stocks are up, but T-bill yields are rock bottom all the way out to 5 year notes, which means everyone is hopping on fixed income government-backed securities. Houses are selling almost instantly as city-dwellers seek to migrate outside of their urban COVID hotspots. You might as well crack a cold one, sit back, and have a family bingo night with CNN headlines, because no one knows what's going to happen tomorrow. People are scared.

<p class="title is-5" style="margin: 0 0 0.5em">No Fear 2021</p>

No matter who is in office or what kind of microchip Bill Gates puts in the COVID vaccine, the church has no reason to fear for the future. Our mission will not fail. Satan has been bound, and the nations of the world which were once held and controlled by him now belong to Christ, who beckons the Church to go forth and make disciples of all of them. We do not go and win the nations for Christ; they are already His. We do not need to pull together a political campaign in order to credential Jesus as someone the federal government would be wise to listen to; He is Lord of all, and His word is Law, and those who do not listen to Him are walking in open rebellion to His rule. There is no room for fear in the hearts of those who believe these things. Though we may win or lose some battles along the way, the war itself has already been won; while the next four years are uncertain to us, the next millennium will be influenced by the Church. 
