---
layout: post
title: Pandora | No Quarter November
author: Chris Carter
published: false
---

[A recent article by _The Atlantic_](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/12/the-last-children-of-down-syndrome/616928/) caught my attention in my work email inbox. I have a work phone (an Apple phone), and because of that, I'm treated to a carefully curated sampling of content from our benevolent Technocrats every morning after I get done checking error logs and answering emails for feature requests. They must think I'm the kind of person who cares about "Barack Obama on What It's Really Like to Live in the White House", or that I'd be in need of advice for "Thoughtfully Navigating This Thanksgiving Season". _The Atlantic_ is a favorite of theirs for this kind of nonsense. I really pity people who have the kind of worldview that these are important, true, pressing, and reasonable things to talk about, let alone clutter my inbox with.

The article is titled "The Last Children of Down Syndrome", and has a particularly disgusting little clickbait hook: "Prenatal testing is changing who gets born and who doesn't. And this is just the beginning."

Now, I read the article, but you don't really have to probe into it at all to do some worldview inference here. The usage of the phrase "who gets born and who doesn't" is enough to tell you what kind of person you're dealing with here, as if being born were comparable to getting ice cream or something. The fact that a major publication like _The Atlantic_ used the phrase "prenatal testing is changing who gets born and who doesn't" and that it didn't result in a national outrage, let alone the immediate termination of the author's sorry position at that sorry journal is enough to indicate that my country has whored itself out to pagan ideology. You know, the same worldview that roasted uncountable newborn babies alive in the hands of Moloch in the land of Canaan. And normalized pedophilic sodomy in the Roman Empire. And gassed millions under Hitler's Socialism. And slaughtered hundreds of millions under Stalin's Communism.

Pagans turn the wheels of society using the heat produced by burning human flesh. Every pagan culture sacrifices the lives of some for the lives of others. In Canaan, newborns were burned alive to appease Moloch and bring rain, for the good of the whole. In the Roman Empire, it was usually young boys and girls who were indentured into sex slavery for the purpose of plain old sexual gratification, marriage, or worship. In Nazi Germany, it was the idol of national identity and racism (the real kind). In Communist Russia, it was the idol of equity, and worship was the destruction of the nuclear family, undying allegiance to the State, and the brutal slaughter of the ever-persistent Bourgeoisie who occupied the shortening tail of the wealth distribution. In America we have many pagan idols, and the one we call "choice" goes by many true names. "Careless orgasm", "selfishness", and "irresponsibility" are a few of them. We worship the idol of "choice" it by sacrificing the lives of our unborn, first by dehumanizing them ("_it_'s just a _clump of cells_...a _parasite_"), and then by murdering them ("aborting _it_...the _pregnancy_").

I say these things in order to frame the cultural context for the article, as one which is willing to sacrifice human life for the sake of some other ethic. In particular, the article wrestles with _what kinds_ of abortions are better than others. It contains some anecdotes, which are almost honest, about stories where parents of children with Down Syndrome felt that they had to trade one kind of guilt for another; the guilt of not being able to provide for a child with special needs with the guilt of murdering the child in the womb.

_No wonder, then, that “choice” can feel like a burden. In one small study of women in the U.S. who chose abortion after a diagnosis of a fetal anomaly, two-thirds said they’d hoped—or even prayed—for a miscarriage instead. It’s not that they wanted their husbands, their doctors, or their lawmakers to tell them what to do, but they recognized that choice comes with responsibility and invites judgment. “I have guilt for not being the kind of person who could parent this particular type of special need,” said one woman in the study. “Guilt, guilt, guilt.”_

Other anecdotes are from medical professionals who opine the sentiment that "maybe a world with fewer people who have Down Syndrome wouldn't be a bad thing". One of these alleged "dilemmas" is summarized well in the quote below:

_The medical field has also been grappling with its ability to offer this power_ [that's what they call abortion]_. “If no one with Down syndrome had ever existed or ever would exist—is that a terrible thing? I don’t know,” says Laura Hercher, a genetic counselor and the director of student research at Sarah Lawrence College. If you take the health complications linked to Down syndrome, such as increased likelihood of early-onset Alzheimer’s, leukemia, and heart defects, she told me, “I don’t think anyone would argue that those are good things.”_

_But she went on. “If our world didn’t have people with special needs and these vulnerabilities,” she asked, “would we be missing a part of our humanity?”_

The answer is yes, Laura. You'd be missing exactly the part of humanity that you played God to; the part of it that medical professionals like yourself counsel pregnant women isn't worth keeping around. Another dilemma, again, almost honest, is phrased particularly well,

_Fertility doctors have spoken to me passionately about expanding access to IVF for parents who are fertile but who might use embryo screening to prevent passing on serious diseases. In a world where IVF becomes less expensive and less hard on a woman’s body, this might very well become the responsible thing to do. And if you’re already going through all this to screen for one disease, why not avail yourself of the whole menu of tests? The hypothetical that Karl Emil’s sister imagined, in which a child’s every risk is laid out, feels closer than ever. How do you choose between one embryo with a slightly elevated risk of schizophrenia and another with a moderate risk of breast cancer?_

The answer is, you don't. In God's world, He is the only one who has the right to make the choice.

Here's the issue: being almost honest is the same thing as lying.
