---
layout: post
title: Christian Theism, Constitutionalism, and COVID-19
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-04-19T16:46:05.787Z
---
Whether we like it or not, the trend of western culture is increasingly towards a nation of post-Christian values. Entertainment, politics, the arts, the media, have diverged, indeed diverged long ago, from simple matters of presenting and deliberating ideas, and have focused nearly all of their energy on opposing values which are considered Christian. When you live in a post-Christian culture, you will have a post-Christian view of sexuality and family, a post-Christian understanding of the role of government, a post-Christian view of language and logic and rhetoric, and a post-Christian view of human dignity. This is the "poison of subjectivism" described by Lewis, a cancer which, when allowed to contaminate objective truth, works its way slowly through the epistemological framework of a society until it has engulfed every maxim from the ethereal to the axiomatic. If only he could see the world today.

This poison is administered not by rational thought, as its apologists would have us believe, but by the submission of human reason to human desire. "I feel this", or "I want this", or "I like this", and therefore, it must be true. This kind of dialectic has already infiltrated Universities who specialize in liberal arts, especially in their programs pertaining to philosophy and english, but increasingly psychology and biology are beginning to bow under the weight of the the pressure applied from within, by their colleagues, and from without, by their rulers. Subjectivism will rot the bones of even the most rock-ribbed scientist, if they do not have their feet placed solidly on a foundation of truth. They call it "postmodernism", with an ironic double qualifier denoting progress: "beyond modern", beyond the peasantry of dialetic and religious values. Postmodern thought is a failure to worship God as He is, in Truth, for the Truth that He is.