---
layout: post
title: Thankful
author: Chris Carter
tags: [No Quarter November]
---

I don't like being cliché, unless there's good reason to be cliché. But, while we are all under house arrest on Thanksgiving, it's a good exercise to talk about things we ought to be thankful for.

I'm not talking about the CDC's version of "being thankful for home and staying there", or for Andrew Cuomo's version of "being thankful" that he's at least allowing you to gather with your own household for thanksgiving, or for BLM and Antifa's version of "being thankful" that they didn't burn and loot your business even though you're white. No, you shouldn't thank a bully because they didn't take your lunch money. Sometimes, "just be thankful for what you have" is code for "shut up and comply, peasant".

No, let us press on for true thankfulness. The real stuff; the kind that changes a man's soul, not the cheap stuff weaponized to tame him. God is the generous and benevolent one in this Universe. Not the CDC, not Trump, not Andrew Cuomo, not BLM and Antifa; no, the Triune God of Scripture deserves our thanks, even if no one else does. By pure grace, God revealed Himself to sinful man in a revelation culminating in the person of Jesus Christ, who died on the cross once for all to make righteous those who receive Him by mere faith, to free them for freedom and obedience, and who will one day return to complete the renewal of all things, a renewal that He makes use of us to bring about. Be thankful for all of that today.
