---
title: A Short Note
author: Chris Carter
layout: post
categories: blog
tags: thoughts
---

Loss is one of the things which bothers me the most about this world. I often feel as if my life is being waited, rather than lived; that each precious moment is slipping through my hands, like a rope, or like fresh water. Each second here, in this small apartment, dies with a ticking which, at times, reverberates deep into my soul with a haunting echo. I fear waking up and being eighty, having missed all my days, and simultaneously fear waking up to face the particular day which has been given to me. Am I a creature who belongs neither here nor there? Neither now nor later? I wish that one second away from those I love, or from doing things which are meaningful, would not have to be replaced by another second of drivel or dysfunction or loneliness. After all, I only have so many seconds. It shouldn't be so, and yet it is the only thing which guarantees the end of the dysfunction of it all; that there will come a day, in the future, when God remakes all things, resolving the dysfunction in the world, but more importantly in _myself_. Jesus came to save sinners, of whom I am the worst. I am vexed, caught between that which I wish to do, and who I wish to be, and who I really am, and what I really do. Am I a creature who is, or one who merely desires to be? Do I, in vain, improve myself so that I may live in a world which is equally vexing as my own being, to the point where I am not sure if it is maturity or cynicism that causes me to believe that nothing will work out well by accident, and with low probability, work out well with a good deal of effort? That is, after all, what it means to live in a futile world; all things are temporal, finite, bounded, and constrained either to human evil because of sin, human error because of foolishness, or that regrettable law of physics which states that the entropy of a system must always increase. All things, no matter how good, are bound to decay with insolvent glue. Things are purposeless, and yet work gives us purpose. Am I a worker, or a mere fiddler? Do I build, or destroy, or only build things which must necessarily be destroyed? Even disciples may become misled, friends may grow apart, and memories may fade...
