---
title: A Reformed People
author: Chris Carter
layout: post
published: false
---

A few days ago I was humbly educated on the meanings of the words "reform" and "refine". A very close friend of mine insisted that they were synonyms, and I was skeptical of this until I actually looked them up in a thesaurus. Turns out, yes, "reform" and "refine" carry the same meaning.

That's surprising, because I think the usual connotations are related, but different. In my mind, to reform was to re-form, that is, to change shape, whereas to refine was to re-fine, that is, to change substance. Both involve change, but reformation always felt more like a physical process implemented with hammers, bricks, logos, and policy, and refinement always felt more like a chemical process implemented with heat, reagents, ethos, and trial. Words with different connotations convey different "senses" of meanings; this is a solid stone which can easily be tripped over. The words "king" and "tyrant" are synonyms which connote different things. Mathematics relies heavily on "definition" as an anchor for proof and inference, the concept which is linguists call "denotation"; what the word actually means, regardless of the emotions attached to it. One of the earliest lessons that students of mathematics learn is that they must probe the definition of a thing for insight into a proof about it. Proofs that seem intractable at the outset can be readily resolved by consulting your notes on what the thing actually is, and thus, what it is actually like. It's very difficult to prove that a function is "uniformly continuous" if you don't know what "uniform continuity" is, much more if you don't know what a "function" is, and much, much more if you've forgotten what a "proof" is. This heavy emphasis on definition is something that I try to carry into my work as a writer and a theologian. God spoke the Universe into existence, and we ought to be careful to say what we mean as well. If I had my way, I would be as exacting as Euler, as entertaining as Chesterton, and as poetic as Rilke.

The laws of connotation require me to say: reformation is refinement. Whatever we wish to see in the world around us must first be in us before we may affect any change. Christians are not socialists; we do not believe that the world's problems are solved by monolithic, top-down, no-questions-asked, gun-to-the-head imposition of equity. We do not believe that the problem is just "out there", and that our duty is to just get "those people" to fall in line. As a first order of business, we must be sure that what we want "out there" is happening "in here", that is, in households and in individual hearts. In Adam, _I am responsible_ for the sin which permeates the world around me, and if I seek to fix them, I must first be fixed. A reformed world is the result of many refined men who live in it. The hammer of reformation which re-shapes households, churches, and nations, works slowly and chemically, purifying the individual molecules of the substance.
