---
title: On Baptism
author: Chris Carter
layout: post
published: false
---

I seem to be attracted to the controversies of theology.

Many Christians in the United States are baptists, meaning specifically that they affirm _credo_-baptism, or baptism on merit of a confession of faith. I myself was raised a baptist, by baptists, was childhood friends with baptists who were raised by baptists, was discipled by baptists, went to a baptist church in college. For a while, I was even confessionally a 1689 Reformed Baptist. The other view, which is far and away much less popular in the United States, is infant baptism (_paedo_-baptism), which is the practice of baptizing an infant on merit of their parents being confessing believers. Most evangelical paedobaptists in the United States are presbyterians.

Both groups agree that baptism is a sacrament that signifies cleansing from sin. This is to say that baptism is the sign of the New Covenant; a sign of promise, and a sign of faith. Where these two groups differ is over the meaning of the phrase "a sign of faith"; namely, _whose_ faith?

Unfortunately, this is one of those situations where one group is definitely right and one group is definitely wrong.

The baptist argument usually goes something like this. New Testament examples of baptism are examples of baptism after a confession of faith, and there is no definitive mentioning in scripture of an infant getting baptized on the merit of the faith of their parents. Each of the examples of household baptism that are given in the New Testament all have sufficient evidence that the whole household came to faith before being baptized one by one. This is a pretty compelling inductive argument to make, and as such, baptists tend to heavily emphasize the symbolism of baptism via immersion. Christ died, was buried, and rose, and so baptists signify faith by going under the water in symbolic death and burial, and coming out of the water in a symbolic resurrection. This is the pattern of New Testament baptism, from John the Baptist through the apostles. All of this is to say that baptists place a heavy emphasis on the confession of the believer when it comes to who is baptized and who is not, and they reserve both the sacrament of baptism and communion for those who have professed their faith publicly.

Paedobaptists, by contrast, usually have a bit more theological argument for their practice of baptizing infants. This view comes from firstly recognizing that Abraham was justified in the same manner that a modern Christian is: by faith. Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness. In the same way, we believe God concerning Christ, and it is credited to us as righteousness as well. We need not make a distinction between the Old and New Testaments when it comes to how God works and saves people; faith is saves in both. The key point is that when Abraham was credited with righteousness, he was instructed by God to take the sign of circumcision, and _also_ to give the sign to every male of his household including his children. Whatever the sign of circumcision is, you cannot say that it is anything less than a sign of _faith_; without Abraham's faith, there would have been no need of the sign in the first place. So it is with baptism in the New Testament. Baptism, like circumcision, is a sign of faith, and so if the head of the household receives the sign then their whole household ought to as well. More plainly, if the head of the household is baptized, then the children ought to be baptized too. Paedobaptists thus place the emphasis on the covenantal aspects of faith, which entails raising their children as if they were Christians, baptism and all, and trusting God that one day they will live up to the sign of faith that they have received.
