---
layout: post
title: Pagans will be Pagans
author: Chris Carter
tags: [The Benedictine Diaries]
---

I'm currently working on a little eschatological exposition of Daniel 2 and 7, but I figured I'd give a brief analysis of the chaos we are find ourselves in right now. The gist of it, Biblically, is that this is what a nation that has rejected the Triune God looks like. Without a transcendent Lawgiver and Judge who holds us accountable for our actions, society devolves into a collection of foolish and selfish individuals who only "do what is right in their own eyes" (Judges 21:25). This is because our first father Adam was created by God to rule in God's way, but Adam chose to rule in his own way. We are by nature sons of Adam, and just as we have inherited the sin of Adam by birth, so we imitate his sin with our own copycat sins (Romans 5:12-14). This results in us making gods of ourselves, which, ironically, means that we will submit to the rule of anything except the Law of our Creator. Every son of Adam is a god unto himself; a pathetic god, who believes himself to be the crown jewel of all creation, yet with no actual power or will to do anything except become drunk on his own selfish passions. This is what the Bible means when it says man is "useless" and "there is none who does good" (Romans 3:12). The restoration of man from this useless state is the work of Christ in His elect in history.

This uselessness is why leftists look the other way when Black Lives Matter and Antifa loot businesses, burn cars, and destroy other items of livelihood. This is also why Andrew Cuomo has devoted the more significant points of his career to making it legal to kill babies and illegal to defend your home and your family with any useful firearm. This is why your benevolent legislators and governors have decided to "help" during this pandemic by placing you on house arrest, forcing you to close your business, and shilling back to you $600 of your own tax money. This is why an angry mob of alleged Trump supporters stormed the Capitol building without the guidance of a lesser magistrate, in a profoundly unproductive attempt to usurp or halt a corrupt political process. This is why many of them are political idolaters who speak of our president with religious reverence. This is why Twitter shut down Donald Trump's account for the sake of "preventing further violence" while allowing "Hang Mike Pence" to trend a few days later. This is why Big Tech went full cartel and shut down rival free-speech social media app Parler. This is why squishy churches are abdicating their responsibility to herald the Gospel of Jesus Christ, instead prostituting the pulpit by making it a platform for social justice and critical race theory. This is _all_ the result of the selfish and sin-drunk ruling of the sons of Adam, who do not believe that they answer to God for their actions.

Pagans will be pagans, I guess. Make no mistake: God alone rules. He will not be taunted by an entire nation for very long. That is why it is the responsibility of _all_ men _everywhere_ to recognize that _they themselves_ are the crux of the issues they see around them, and to repent, and turn to Christ. God readily forgives the crushed and readily crushes the immoral, and make no mistake: all Americans, myself included, are unquestionably, profoundly, categorically immoral people. May we repent, and God help me, and help us.
