---
title: Why They Aren't the Same
author: Chris Carter
layout: post
published: false
---

You'd have to be living under a fairly thick and heavy rock to be unaware of what's happened over the past couple of days. The gist of what you need to know is that a bunch of Trump supporters stormed the capitol building yesterday as a means of protest. Note, that I don't use the term "Trump supporter" as an insult, as many do; I voted for Trump twice, and I would probably do it again even in light of this event. I don't condone what happened, and I wouldn't do it myself, but I also understand the urge to take this kind of action when the Republic sliding ever faster down a slippery slope leading to some sort of socialist dystopia where no one knows what gender they are, much less what a "vote" is. This was not a simple revolt because "we didn't get what we wanted"; if that was the case, something like this would have happened around the time of Obama's second inauguration. No, this event took place because most on the Right thought this election was more than a little sketchy. They uncovered their own evidence of fraud, voiced their doubts, and were told that their evidence didn't count. Rather than being presented with a series of arguments legitimizing the results of the election, they were told to stop asking questions, go back to their seats, sit quietly, and accept the narrative of the technocrats and the mainstream media. Combining this kind of suppression and patronization with a crowd of well-founded and angry doubters with a strong leader gets you something like this. If we blame Trump, we should also blame Mark Zuckerberg, CNN, Fox, and Biden. Maybe China too.

This event and the BLM and Antifa rallies this summer are the same, in that they involve large numbers of people holding signs and doing nefarious things. That's about the only way they are the same. BLM and Antifa gathered multiple times in multiple cities to attack people, homes, businesses, private property, cars, and churches for the sake of fighting "systemic racism" (whatever that is). Trump supporters gathered once in Washington D.C. to attack the building which houses the civil government of their nation, because they have a legitimate concern that fraudulent stuff lives inside. The enemy of each is made clear by the targets they engaged and how they engaged them. The former hates the individual, and the latter hates corrupt government. The former had violent means to violent ends (namely, Marxist utopia), while the latter had violent means to distinctly democratic and republican ends. Et cetera.

I'm a bit more of a passivist than most of my right-wing brethren. I'll qualify that statement by saying that I own a fair number of firearms, and I think violence is warranted in scenarios of self defense, defense of another, as an agent of the civil government such as a police officer, or in participation in a just war as a soldier. That said, as an ardent postmillennialist, I participate in bringing the world into submission to Christ via Gospel preaching, and not bloody revolution. It is not that I am unwilling to fight, but rather that the kind of reformation brought about by sinners' blood may be quickly unreformed by sinners' blood as well. By contrast, the kind of reformation brought about by Christ's blood is everlasting with respect to a single life, and long-lasting in a society of many reformed lives.

_P.S._ Can we talk about how a group was able to storm into the Capitol Building of our nation and do _pretty much whatever they wanted_ all while being almost entirely unarmed? That seems like a problem to me.
