---
layout: post
title: The Kingdom of Heaven - Daniel 2 and 7
author: Chris Carter
published: false
---

As I have said before, the study of eschatology does not begin with ends. It would be unreasonable to expect that we could understand the end of a book without understanding its beginning and middle too. I'll be starting in the middle today. Much of the teaching of the Bible centers around the concept of "The Kingdom of Heaven", which is sometimes called "The Kingdom of God". A good deal of eschatological study is trying to nail down what scripture teaches us about what the Kingdom of Heaven is, where it is, whose it is, where it is headed, etc. A king, lest he be a lunatic, has a kingdom _somewhere_. My essay [The Eschatology of Christmas](https://chrisevancarter.com/2020/12/25/the-eschatology-of-christmas) is my feeble attempt to exalt Christ as the King who came in the flesh to win and to rule the Kingdom of Heaven, and if we know our King, we ought to understand what His Kingdom is like.

The book of Daniel is quickly becoming one of my favorites to study. It is rich in many theological truths. In particular, Daniel 2 and Daniel 7 speak profoundly to the reality of the kingdom of heaven and the ascension of Jesus Christ. Daniel 2 is the story of a dream which greatly troubled King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. The pagan king dreamt of a great statue with a head of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of bronze, legs of iron, and feet of iron and clay, which is smashed on the feet by a great stone which becomes a great mountain and fills the whole earth. He was so distraught that He threatened to destroy all the wise men of Babylon because there was no one with the wisdom to interpret it. Daniel, of course, had wisdom from God, and he explains this vision to the king: four human kingdoms, and then a divine kingdom. I take these four kingdoms to be Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome, as many other commentators do; the identity of the first kingdom, Babylon, is given to us in the text (Daniel 2:36-38), and so it's just a matter of fitting in the relevant history to make that inference. The fourth kingdom I take to be Rome, on account that it was a "mixed" kingdom of Romans and Jews, but that's for another time, and I probably wouldn't die on that just yet hill anyway. Regardless, these four kingdoms would be crushed by a divine kingdom, one that is holy, built without human hands or human effort, that is "cut out of the mountain without hands" (Daniel 2:45). Of this kingdom, the text says in Daniel 2:44,

_And in the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom which will never be destroyed, and that kingdom will not be left for another people; it will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, but it will itself endure forever._

So the kingdom that Daniel speaks of is not only divine, but everlasting. It will not, unlike human kingdoms, be pillaged or overrun by another human kingdom, nor will it be usurped internally with treasonous coup or clever espionage. It would be an impressive feat of hermeneutical and exegetical acrobatics for us to conclude that this is _anything other than_ a kingdom which has been established in our past. If the text were describing a kingdom which has yet to exist in our future, it would have to be shown that there is a succession of no more than three other distinct kingdoms from the time of Babylon to the present day. That's a real circus contortion, if I may say so, and most scholars agree that this passage is referring to human kingdoms which have already come and gone. So, this divine kingdom is everlasting, and was established in our past; it must be present _somewhere_. Some will say that this is a spiritual kingdom which currently exists only in heaven, and not on earth. I take it to be a kingdom which is here on earth, really and presently, because it is likened to a mountain which fills the whole earth (Daniel 2:35) and a solely heavenly kingdom would not be able to do that.

There are other reasons to believe that this kingdom really is here on earth. Daniel 7 is an eschatologically rich passage, which most likely deserves a whole commentary. Maybe when I'm ready to do that one day, I will, but for now I'll stick to brevity and brass tacks. It is my view that the text of Daniel 7 describes the same events that are described in Chapter 2, with more detail. There are "four beasts coming up from the sea" (Daniel 7:3), just as there were four pagan kingdoms in Daniel 2, and "the sea" is a common scriptural metaphor for the world of the Gentiles. Indeed, these beasts plainly _are_ four kingdoms (Daniel 7:17), described here in typical apocalyptic fashion as great beasts. The identity of the fourth beast, a great monster with iron teeth that treads down the world underneath its feet, is given special attention in this passage as "a fourth kingdom" which will "devour the whole earth" (Daniel 7:23), which had a horn which "uttered great boasts" (Daniel 7:8), that would "wage war against the saints" (Daniel 7:21). Sounds like Rome to me, and the timeframe references fit that. In this chapter we get a preview of what I take to be the ascension of Christ, where the Son of Man is presented before the Ancient of Days,

_“I kept looking in the night visions, And behold, with the clouds of heaven One like a son of man was coming, And He came up to the Ancient of Days And was presented before Him. And to Him was given dominion, Honor, and [a]a kingdom, So that all the peoples, nations, and populations of all [b]languages Might serve Him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion Which will not pass away; And His kingdom is one Which will not be destroyed._ (Daniel 7:13-14)

We ought to think of the great stone which smashed the feet of the statue seen by Nebuchadnezzar. That stone became a great mountain which filled the whole earth, and here, this Rock, Christ, is given an everlasting dominion. That stone obliterated the pagan kingdoms, and this Rock annihilated the rule of the little horn (Daniel 7:26). That stone
