---
layout: post
title: Unknowable
author: Chris Carter
published: false
---

Ever since I was a little boy, the workings of the world have gripped my mind with intrigue and wonder. I was a quiet and introverted child, always observant and contemplative, and often found myself looking at the world and wondering the way that it worked. Growing up on a small farm in rural Vermont left me with little else to do. I would often go explore the small creek in front of the house to observe and flow of the water, or I would ponder the color and shape of the flames of a campfire, or I might just watch the clouds and observe the wind, and dwell on why certain weather systems never seemed to reach the house from certain directions, or why the wind always blew in a regular direction at certain time of day during a certain season. I was a curious boy, and I’m still very curious as a man; I often add cream to my hot coffee without stirring it, just to watch how the cream dances and swirls to the unheard music of convection and fluid mechanics.

This natural curiosity fueled a lot of my educational ambition. I was always intrigued with the subject I knew the least about at the time. When I was young, I wanted to explain the ways things moved and interacted, so I delved into the study of physics, calculus, and engineering. Then I got a little older, and chemistry and biology became the locus of my curiosity, so I devoted my time to the study of reactions and molecular conformations. College was the height of my scientific education, as I studied mathematics. This gave me ample time to investigate mathematical logic, mathematical modeling, physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, computer science, and probability theory. These days, rhetoric, prose, and poetry are where I find my curiosity diligently observing, and quietly experimenting.

Mathematics was a natural choice for me. I displayed great aptitude in mathematics from a young age, and the ubiquity of mathematics in the sciences I was interested in complimented my intrinsic desire to understand the world. If I was curious about something, I would do some research on how it worked, and eventually come upon a mathematical equation or principle which explained, at least in part, how the thing worked. That is classically what mathematics means: knowledge, study, learning. It is the foundation of all other sources of scientific knowledge, and therefore my education was not just an avenue for me to study math itself, rather, it was an opportunity to engage in research about a myriad of sciences. It was an amazing opportunity.

I discovered a great deal of the nature of mathematics, logic, and the scientific method during my education. The strongly predictive and descriptive qualities of math, especially when applied to physical phenomena were intensely satisfying. At the same time, I learned of a very special property of mathematics known as "incompleteness". Math is, in general, the science of structure, quantity, change, and relation, and deep statements about these things are made by the process of deduction of logically necessary things from axioms. These deductions are known as proofs, and provide a series of little bridges which can be used to traverse mathematical truth and learn new things. But because math has been proven to be incomplete, there are some statements in mathematics which are true, and yet are unprovable. If each theorem in mathematics were an island, and proofs were the bridges between islands, then incompleteness would mean that there were some islands that you couldn't build a bridge to, no matter how brilliant or well-educated you were.

This fact stunned me the first time I heard of it.
