---
layout: post
title: Challenge
author: Chris Carter
published: false
---

I was a track athlete, under a relatively forward-thinking young coach named Jeff Kauffman. Track athletes need to get stronger, since stronger muscles can produce more force, and speed is all about how much force you can apply to the track in a given amount of time to accelerate your body towards the finish line. Kauffman understood that, which is why twice a week we did front squats, bench press, prowler pushes, and handstand holds. Occasionally, we did hang cleans as well. For those who are unaware, a hang clean is a movement where the lifter uses the legs to move the bar from the "hang" position, with the bar in the hands in a standing position at the thighs, to the "rack" position, with the bar resting on the shoulders. It's a tremendous exercise for building strength and explosive power in the quads, hamstrings, and upper back, which are all areas which are important for track athletes to be strong in.  

The strength work was always my favorite. It was a puzzle, a logic problem, a work of art; there was a right way to do it, and when done right, it was beautiful. There is an elegance to a squat, or a deadlift, or a press, or a snatch, or any other barbell lift which is executed well. This is because human beings recognize and are attracted to the subtleties of excellence in physicality, and this applies to deadlifts and squats just as much as it applies to gait or to facial features. Athletes with a certain proprioceptive sensitivity, and an eye for detail, can feel and see insufficiencies in the execution of their movements. In addition to my relatively good linguistic and mathematical intelligence, I also have fairly good physical intelligence, especially with respect to strength training. This is why I've never needed a coach.

Unfortunately, we didn't do very many hang cleans. That was a shame, since it was a movement I really enjoyed, and it was one I was looking forward to figuring out. When we stopped training them in practice, I went home one evening and looked up "hang clean" on YouTube. The first result was an old Cal Strength video of Donny Shankle hang clean and jerking 200 kilograms. You can still find the video. From then on, I became fond of watching the California Strength YouTube channel. For those who aren't in the weightlifting world, Cal Strength is an Olympic weightlifting gym in San Francisco, California, known for training some of the best weightlifters in the United States. Little did I know that the training videos I was watching would later become records of what was known as "the Wonder Years" at Cal Strength. During that time, they had what Tommy Suggs calls "the X Factor": where the environment of the gym is more than the sum of its parts, where the energy electrifies the whole atmosphere. A couple times, I've had the privilege of training in that kind of environment: the right guys, with the right attitudes. Under the watchful eye of the late Glenn Pendlay, the lifts that Donny Shankle, Jon North, Spencer Moorman, Kevin Cornell, and others, would routinely hit in training were pretty astounding, especially for American bodies.

Let's talk about weightlifting.

The goal is to get the bar overhead. There are basically two ways to do this. You can move the bar from the ground to overhead in one motion, in a movement known as a snatch, or you can move the bar from the ground to your shoulders and then from your shoulders to overhead, in a two-part movement known as the clean and jerk. Done correctly, these lifts are performed very quickly and gracefully. For me, it was the mixture of aggression, precision, and grace inherent in the execution of the lifts which originally attracted me to the sport of weightlifting.
