---
layout: post
title: On Hypocrisy
categories: blog
published: false
---

A man who acts against the way that he speaks is a moral absurdity.

He is foremost an absurdity, in a technical manner. An absurdity is nothing short of holding two logically contradictory things as both true; "he is a married bachelor" is a conjunction of the two contradictory statements "he is married" and "he is a bachelor". In other words, a contradiction is a statement which is always false (for the sake of contrast, a statement which is always true is called a tautology). To act against the way you speak is to assert either that what you say is true and what you do is false, or that what you say is false and what you do is true. In either case, you make yourself out to be a living and breathing absurdity.

Yet further than this, a man who acts against his word is not only an absurdity, he is a moral absurdity. There are three possible scenarios if his actions are not in line with his words. He may be telling the truth but not acting in accordance with the truth, in which case he is a sage who is too cowardly or too impotent to act in accordance with his own wisdom. He may on the other hand be acting according to what is true without telling the truth, in which case he is either a Biblical impossibility (a man with a pure heart from whose mouth proceeds impure things) or a clever con-man who acts rightly to save himself and profit off of the lies he tells others. Thirdly, he may be neither telling the truth with his actions or his words, instead doing or saying whatever is convenient to his desires at the time, even if what he is saying and what he is doing immediately contradict each other in that moment. In any of these cases he has stained himself with moral guilt by making himself to be a liar, by some combination of lying with his words and lying with his actions.

This kind of inconsistency is the vice known as hypocrisy. It is the vice we fall into when we treat others with kindness in their presence but utter our disdain for them in their absence, or when we make vows on our wedding day and break them in an act of adultery, or when we say we stand against the systemic oppression of black lives while neglecting to stand against the systemically allowed murder of black babies. Inconsistent words and actions break commitments, deceive others, and come with all of the avoidable complexities that come from lying.

What must be understood in light of this is that the correlative nature between words and actions is only the tip of the iceberg with respect to hypocrisy. The root of the matter is much deeper than this. To avoid hypocrisy we must not only avoid acting in ways which contradict our words, but acting in ways which contradict our other actions, or saying things which contradict our other words, or believing things which contradict our other beliefs. These are not separate categories of things; speaking is action from belief, just as action is from belief and verbal commitment. These three are linked, just as our bodies and minds and emotions cannot function independently from one another. Therefore if we seek to avoid the vice of hypocrisy, we must strive that our whole being functions in accordance with itself. Sin has plunged the world into chaos, such that no thing acts harmoniously with anything else. It did this having begun as a pinprick of disorder in a world of order, such that disorder began to spread to all other things. It is from this disorder that lives within us and within the world around us that we act against ourselves and one another in selfish and inconsistent ways, from the largest wars to the smallest injustices.

Everything in the world is in open rebellion against God, and further, each part is in rebellion with each other part in a completely different manner. Thus, within every sinner there are parts of him or her which cannot agree with the other parts. We believe one thing, and say another thing, and do yet another thing out of the chaos within our being which tosses us around in every manner except in the direction of reverence, faith, and repentance.

The remedy to the cosmic hypocrisy which envelops us begins with adjustment of belief, because what we believe directly affects what we say and what we do. Operating as a single self-consistent being must begin with a single self-consistent worldview, without fracture or contradiction, agreeing with itself, with the truth of scripture, and with the world around it.
