---
layout: post
title: Against Self Care
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-07-06T15:27:09.305Z
categories: blog
---
"Self care" is an ethic which holds self-preservation as the highest good, to be attained at all cost. Evangelists of the self-care ethic promote, in general, ways of identifying and removing "toxicity" from life, whether it exists in people, relationships, organizations, jobs, or any other facet of life, as a result of placing all other ethics as inferior to the supreme ethic of self-preservation. By this, most commonly, the ethic of loyalty to a friend or a family member is overruled by the ethic of self-preservation if they are a "toxic person", and they ought to be abandoned for as long as they are momentarily or temporally toxic to you. 

No doubt, we must take care of ourselves in some capacity. Those who don't eat correctly, sleep well, stay in shape, balance their checkbook, or keep their mind in order become weak, tired, indebted, and ineffective, rendering themselves useless instruments of care to others. Parents who do not take care of themselves place their children at greater risk, as do employers whose self-neglect creates instability in the lives of their employees, as does everyone from the most powerful CEOs and politicians, to humble pastors, family members, and friends. One of the ways in which we can care for others is simply by being steady, capable people, who can be there at the right time and in the right condition for whatever the circumstances require. For most of us, that means eating well, getting enough rest, committing to some form of exercise, and stimulating our minds with new ideas and healthy relationships. Rather than doing these things for their own sake, we do them so that we will have the ability to work hard, aspire to our callings, and subsequently give our friends and families better lives. What, then, is the line? How much of our energy are we supposed to spend on self-care?

None.

The life of our Lord did not model for us a pattern of cutting out "toxic people", or abdicating responsibility in order to "decompress". Rather, by His word and His deeds, we are met with a call to live life without worry for whether we will be clothed or provided for, since "not even solomon in all of his splendor" was clothed as God clothes the flowers of the field. We are taught that we are not to seek to direct our own life towards pleasure, for He says "follow me", and "whatever the Father is doing, I do" and "whoever wishes to follow me must deny himsef, take up his cross, and come after me", to the end that we are to live as He lived and love as He loves, for "greater love has no man than this, that he would lay down his life for his friends".