---
layout: post
title: The End of Civility
author: Chris Carter
categories: blog
published: false 
---

_Please bear with some mathematical jargon. I actually have a blog [here](https://www.someappliedtheoretics.com) where I just talk about math, physics, computer science, and other related things, and I understand that this is not that place. Trust me, I am going somewhere with this._

Applied mathematicians (like me) sometimes turn their attention to the study of _iterative maps_, which can be thought of as a sequence of states where each state is determined completely by its preceding state. Even simple nonlinear systems of this nature can exhibit some very nuanced and complex behavior like cycles, period doubling, strange attractors, and state-space mixing. Generally, _how_ to get to the next state depends on some parameters which describe the nature of the system; a set of numbers, which _mean something_, and which can be varied to alter the behavior of the system. Mathematicians who were studying single-parameter iterative nonlinear maps noticed that as the system parameter increased beyond certain values called "bifurcation points" the function forked ("_bi_-furcated") into having two fixed points, and upon reaching another bifurcation point, four fixed points, and then eight, and then sixteen, and so on, at each successive bifurcation. Additionally, each point was reached exponentially more quickly than the last, until the fixed points blended into an set which was so topologically mixed that the future behavior of the system became effectively indeterminate and unpredictable. That is what chaos is: uncertainty which does not arise from randomness; determinism of path without approximate determinism of path.

I began to study such things when I was very young. I had a strong aptitude for reasoning and critical observation, as well as a curious appetite for how the world worked. Naturally, I devoted a lot of my schooling and education to the study of the sciences, especially mathematics and the physical sciences. What I came to understand very quickly is that the more mathematics I knew of, the better I understood the world around me, and the more readily I could conceptualize the interesting behavior of the world into a framework within which I could gain understanding and ask questions. Even very complex and messy things have patterns which can be measured and used to predict future behavior; this is the premise of some of the first articles I wrote on this blog.

We like to think of human beings as complex, individual, and unpredictable creatures who rule their lives with their own autonomy. There is some truth to that. Like a gas in a tank, describing each particle of gas as it interacts with other particles and with the boundaries of the tank is monumentally difficult. However, predicting the "average" behavior of the gas in the tank, and thus the average behavior of an individual particle, is remarkably simple; the likelihood of the tank being in one state or another can be written down in a remarkably simple equation known as the Boltzmann Distribution. There is no need to consider every individual human life and action undertaken by them in order to understand a society; we need only look at the average behavior of the whole show to understand it.

From the book of Romans, chapter 1, we can be sure that a society may only be so Godless before it falls apart. It is a guarantee of the created order, by the decree of God, that those who fail to revere God as He is, are given over to increasing levels of depravity and sin. First He gives them over to sexual promiscuity, so that they abandon traditional monogamous heterosexual marriage between a man and a woman, instead embracing fornication (and other things which are unfit for saints to mention) as a valid and ethical form of sexual expression. He then gives them over to homosexuality, so that men and women abandon their natural function with each other in order to have intercourse with those of their own sex. If they still continue in their irreverence, He gives them over to a completely debased mind, so that they happily trade reasoning according to wisdom, logic, and evidence, for reasoning based on their immediate emotions and desires.

Now, consider the average behavior of American society for the past few decades. An analysis of pop culture, news media, and legislation will indicate very clearly that the Romans 1 spiral into depravity is on display. These pieces of evidence correspond to average behavior in a bidirectional sense; they serve to influence culture, and be influenced by culture. Whatever is on TV, in the movies, in the news, or in the laws, is a reflection of the American people. The years surrounding the 1960s through the 1980s saw a great cultural shift in the attitude of the people towards non-traditional sexuality; the Christian view of sex as intimacy which was only to be shared between a man and his wife was seen as unnecessarily narrow and restrictive, and thus the "sexual revolution" collectively normalized extramarital sex, pornography, masturbation, public nudity, divorce, and abortion. This was the first bifurcation point. From there, homosexuality began to gain traction, evolving from an underground and illegal practice to one which was publicly normalized, legalized, and even celebrated just a few decades later. This was the second bifurcation point. Since then, those of us in the Christian church have seen our society devolve into what can only be described as utter madness. The easiest example if this is the widespread social adoption of "transgenderism" as a valid form of sexual identity. It is now socially accepted that a man can become a woman if he "feels" like he is a woman, and by "feeling" this way, he may disregard and contradict the myriad of biological and psychological evidence that he is indeed _not_ a man. This is objective evidence of mental illness, but our culture celebrates it as liberation.

One of the fundamental assumptions of the democratic process is the guarantee that an agent of a dissenting opinion will face no threat of violence from opposing political groups, or from the state itself. In the United States, this is the idea of "freedom of speech", based upon John Stuart Mill's maxim that even the most reprehensible opinions in a society must be not only heard, but respected. Ideally, you would be able to say whatever you wanted and know that your fundamental rights to own a business, avoid bodily harm, protect your own property, or whatever else is an inalienable God-given right, would be protected by the state. In order for a state to be truly ruled "by the people", it must be such that every person in the state has a voice in the decision-making process (either directly, or via a representative). This necessitates the ability to engage in civil discussion about _any_ topic, no matter how reprehensible it may _appear_ to one side of the dialogue.

What we are witnessing in the culture at the moment is the end of rational discussion as a vehicle of political and cultural progress. The foremost example of this is the rise of the most powerful political party in the history of the United States: Black Lives Matter. "Black Lives Matter" is not merely a statement of solidarity against racial oppression; it is a summary of a Marxist creed, which announces allegiance to a Marxist political party. The advent of postmodern thought as the default framework for understanding the rest of the world within the Liberal Arts was one of the markers of the end of the Age of Reason. It is from postmodernism that BLM can stand upon a racial dialectic, and argue for policy decisions to be made upon the basis of the existence of "white privilege" and "systemic racism". Reasoned argumentation no longer requires a logical deduction from premises which have already been established to be true, as has been the case from the time of Aristotle. Instead, "you're white, therefore you are a racist" is a sound and unassailable argument; there is no room for political discourse anymore. Political action no longer relies on deliberation about the best way to structure the society, but consists solely in the drawing of boundary lines around what is an acceptable opinion, and who is on the right side of history.  
