---
title: The Verge of Fracture
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-06-07T13:44:49.469Z
categories: blog
---
Some predictions:

1. "Wokeness", i.e. the percieved awareness of social justice issues, is currently experiencing nothing short of a religious revival. In a matter of weeks, the deaths of Ahmaud Arbery, Brianna Taylor, and George Floyd have catalyzed a national upheaval of the status quo. The national response began first with protests and riots, followed by the inundation of social media with the prosyletization of anti-"whiteness" and anti-"systemic racism", followed closely by a nearly ubiquitous public confession of the sin of "white priviledge" and a public repentance from unconscious alignment with structures which promote systematized oppression of minorities. The rallies, protests, and riots we have observed in our cities bear little resemblance to specific requests for sociopolitical change, and rather, seem to hold more resemblance to religious zeal. The social response to the untimely and unjust deaths of these people, who are made in the image of God, has initiated a series of social changes which will eventually fundamentally undermine the Christian conception of justice, and further, will lay the bricks for an entirely new worldview.
2. The social pressure of adhering to this new worldview will increase with time, to the point where many businesses, corporations, organizations, and churches will need to make a public proclamation of their undying devotion to the new Marxist ethic, for fear of losing customers and patrons. Some will do this willingly, and others will do it shewdly, and still others will refuse to do it. Within Evangelicalism, which has been plagued a soft spine for decades, more liberal churches and congregants will happily embrace this new worldview, whilst more conservative churches and congregants will face immense pressure from the world and their apostic counterparts.