---
layout: post
title: The Unknowable
author: Chris Carter
published: false
categories: blog
---

_"But deep in the darkness is God..." ~ Rilke_

In our quest for knowledge, we assume that all things which are true are knowable.

In most cases, it is a necessary assumption that what we seek to know, or to make, or to accomplish, is indeed actually possible to know, to make, or to accomplish. The journey must begin, at least in some capacity, before the feasibility of reaching the end destination can be evaluated. "How might we get there?" is a better question than "can we arrive at all?". Man's insatiable ambition and curiosity often preclude the latter attitude automatically, not by means of reason, but by means of passion. Man is more likely to keep attempting to lead a metaphorical horse to water after it has been long dead than to step back and consider the vitality of the horse and the feasibility of his endeavor to make it drink. This kind of ambition is what we have to thank for many of the blessings that we enjoy in our daily lives. The drive, creativity, and effort of many scientists, philosophers, artists, entrepreneurs, engineers, and so on, has lead the intellectual, philosophical, artistic, and technological charge of progress into history. The tenacity that exists within each person to grit through adversity in order to attain success is the engine of progress.

Thus, curiosity and passion provide the fuel for exploration, and rationalism provides the justification for burning the fuel. With this in mind, it's reasonable to say that attaining knowledge is just another thing to accomplish, and to post-industrialism post-enlightenment inhabitants of society, it is almost axiomatic to relegate every truth to the category of "knowable". Having been conditioned to seek explanation for things which are not understood, and having historically found satisfactory explanation for those things, we conclude inductively that all phenomena which we could want to explain are, indeed, explainable. Man no longer gazes at the night sky in complete ignorance, awe, and wonder, nor does he marvel at the boundary established to keep the ocean distinct from the land, nor the ability for a bird to fly through the air using the effort of its wings. He is content to observe these things and use the explanations of science and philosophy he has learned in his education to provide for himself a convincing case as to why these things should be so. "Here is the law and the theory behind why this occurs", he explains, providing an explanation to a single question of "why?", and subsequently imparting life to dozens more "whys" which would logically follow the inference he has provided. Science and philosophy march on in this manner of recursive explanation, seeking to explain the current explanations or to reject them in favor of better ones, ever growing the perimeter of darkness which surrounds our faint circle of luminance, within which, we claim to know. Mystery, which once anointed Man's whole being, now occupies no more space in his mind than what is necessary to facilitate the process of wrestling with what the next explanation should be. This is not to say that there isn't a great deal of mystery in the world, but the quality of the mysterious has been tamed and diluted by the hubris of rationalism, with its constant self-consolation that all things can be known and explained in due time and with due effort.

Modern man no longer occupies a world of abundant mystery, at least in his own mind. It would seem as if mystery is dying, and that science and philosophy are in the process of killing it, slowly: one equation, one full-factorial analysis, one peer-reviewed publication at a time.

This is where we turn to mathematics, the subject of my undergraduate education. Mathematics is the study of structure, quantity, space, and change, and is known for its ability to explain and predict phenomena in the natural world. This alone is a great mystery, and there has always been debate over the explanation of why this occurs; is mathematics inherent to the substance of the Universe, as something to be discovered, or is it a tool that was created by man to understand the world? The ontology of math is an interesting point of debate, but is tangential to something far more fundamental: it is almost universally agreed that mathematics is the argumentative and explanatory foundation of the natural sciences. Whenever science makes a claim about the world, it uses mathematics to argue for, describe, and explain it. This is obviously true in sciences like physics, but even the softer sciences like psychology rely heavily on the subject of statistics to make informed conclusions from data. From the most complex problems in calculus or mathematical modeling, all the way down to the simplest arithmetic problems, math is the foundation of most modern knowledge.

From the time we are first taught arithmetic in our young ages, all the way up through high school, it seems that nothing could be more certain, explainable, or knowable than mathematics. For centuries, this was the prevailing view among mathematicians as well. It was believed that that everything in mathematics could be proved; that all true mathematical statements, even the ones which have not been discovered yet, could be proved to be true at some point with enough time, creativity, and effort. We are so used to "solving problems" in mathematics that it almost never crosses our mind that there may be some problems in which by their very nature can't be solved. This is different than not having the insight to solve a problem; people are limited, and therefore there are some math problems which are beyond human capacity to solve. No doubt, there have been and will be incomprehensibly brilliant people who uncover great mysteries in mathematics, but even the brightest people still have a limited intelligence and a finite amount of time to do mathematics. Thus mathematics is "practically" incomplete, but is it "absolutely" incomplete? "Unsolvable" problems are things which can never be solved, not even by a perfect intelligence, or the most powerful computer ever to exist. Many early 20th century mathematicians and philosophers, believed that unsolvable problems didn't exist, and some actually set out to accomplish the task of proving all the mathematics they possibly could. Notably, renowned philosophers Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead embarked on this very task in the _Principia Mathematica_, a publication of theirs which would be an all-inclusive and monolithic work of mathematics as a whole; every proof, for every truth of math, laying to rest mathematical mystery for all of time.

Stunningly, a young mathematician named Kurt Godel published a theorem which he called, humbly, "Theorem IV" in his paper ____, in which he states that mathematics, and more broadly any kind of mathematics which could be invented, is incomplete: there would, for any system of axioms, always be statements which were true and yet not provable. Math would always contain unsolvable problems, unprovable statements, and therefore unknowable things even to the best and brightest minds. It was always known that mathematics was razor sharp, but until Godel it was unknown that it also had two edges: mathematics allows us to know truths which cannot be perceived, and to perceive the existence of truths which can never be known. Given what I know about computer science, it is my conviction that mathematics is more unknowable than knowable; it is more unprovable than provable.

I love mathematics, and I love many things about mathematics, but I love the certainty of its incompleteness most of all. We must infer from it that some truths, some beauties, and some wonders, are unknowable and always will be unknowable to us, as these things exist solely for God Himself to enjoy. Human knowledge is not a great city of light, illuminated by our own brilliance at all sides and from all angles as if by the sun itself. Human reason does not pierce the thick darkness of ignorance like a mighty sword, for there are some things which it cannot penetrate. We are not shielded by the impenetrable walls of rational conclusion, rather, we cling to our feeble and low inferences, huddled about candles of theorem to watch their flames dance, while behind our backs The Unknowable lurks beyond the reaches of the dim luminance, as a vast wilderness, silent, unbothered by the presence of consciousness; it has far more important concerns. If we were to turn and face the great void we might see shapes, moving, dancing, hovering in the shadows as the candles behind our backs flicker back and forth from object to object, their images as mirages, their true conformations never to be understood. Even our daily lives, as routine as they are, do not escape entanglement in the threads of mystery which, like long tentacles of unknowable truth, slip through the brick and mortar of the tightest theorems we could muster to buttress our dim epistemology.

And yet to God, it is all as clear as day. He knows all of the wonderous truths and beauties which He created the unknowable forms to display to Himself, in addition to the incomprehensible truths which He knows about Himself. He is enthroned so high above every truth, which lays itself bare to Him and declares His glory for all of eternity. Every mystery in mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, astronomy, philosophy, or any other discipline of reason, was written by Him and for Him. Man knows what he knows not because of his own brilliance, but because of God's decree that knowledge may be given to man that he may know of God, and yet not even begin to grasp His greatness. All men are deeply shrouded in mystery, and yet know urgently and imminently of the presence and work of God in all of creation. All men are simultaneously awed and terrified by the beauty of what they can see; some are driven to dread at the juxtaposition of the apparent harmony of the Universe around them and the disharmony of their own soul within them.
