---
title: Repentance
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-07-01T13:42:27.980Z
categories: blog
---
Repentance, "to change one's mind or purpose", is to turn the whole being; to fundamentally have changed the disposition of the seat of moral conviction. In the context of sin, repentance is a cease and desist from that which stands to contradict the Law of God, and to turn to Christ in confession, to seek forgiveness, and to do so in truth, without the intent to return to your own vomit. 

What a wondrous thing it is, that at one time we may be walking in sin, serving ourselves and our own selfish interests, corrupted to the bone to serve our own desires, enslaved to forever shake our fist at the Heavens and curse the God who created us! We who sin, all of us, proclaim in every facet of our lives our utter contempt and enmity with God, who formed and designed us so that we would enjoy Him forever! Do we not spit in His face by our cowardice, or our sexual promiscuity, or our self-serving, or our anger, or our violence, or our apathy? Have we not, collectively, warranted every single one of the trials and sufferings that we have experienced? And is it not peculiar that the gates of Hell have not opened wide to swallow the whole Earth, and to rid the Universe of the plague which is humanity? I concur with Mr. Edwards, that the only thing which thinly veils every human being from the wrath of God is His great and gentle benevolence; God is kind, He is tolerant, even towards the greatest sins of humanity, storing up wrath for the day of judgement, that all at once the weight of His judgement may fall upon the human race like a great hailstorm of fire, so that even the kings of the earth will long for the mountains themselves to fall upon them, and to hide them from the face of a God whose tolerance has run out. 

We have greeted our benevolent Father with an open hand strike, and taken our inheritance early, and gone to a far away land to squander our new riches with parties, drugs, sex, and all manner of promiscuity.