---
title: The False Gospel of Social Justice
author: Chris Carter
date: 2020-06-11T22:23:49.276Z
categories: blog
---
*Fathers shall not be put to death for their sons, nor shall sons be put to death for their fathers; everyone shall be put to death for his own sin. (Deuteronomy 28:16)*

*For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. (Romans 6:28)*

I write this as a man who loves the Gospel above all, who desires to see the name of Jesus lifted on the wings of high praise, and whose heart would rejoice if his friends, his acquaintances, and his nation would repent and turn to Him. It is from scripture, and from the sanctifying work of Christ in me, that I declare that I cannot stand with those who promote social justice, nor can I fellowship as a Christian with those who believe that the Gospel is insufficient to restore the whole world to order, and peace, and righteousness. My heart is heavy for the state of my nation and the American church, which in a matter of months has gone from a leisurely stroll along the path of Godless progressivism, to making strenuous leaps and bounds in the same direction. Simultaneously I praise God for those whom He will, by His sovereign decree, preserve to persevere through the churning waves of doctrine which assail us in these days. I know that the church will be purified. 

The call for solidarity with those who stand in favor of social justice has risen from an invitation to political assent to a hellfire sermon, which demands from its listeners far more than a mere proclamation of a leftist political stance on the meanings of "equality" and "justice". Solidarity with social justice is more akin to a religious conversion: a paradigm shift wherein a person is enlightened to the reality of "systemic racism" and their contribution to its propagation through their "privilege". As the concepts which underpin Critical Theory and Marxism occupy more of the verbiage of public discourse, so the justification for their claims grows purely as a function of numerosity, and it will not be long before a great majority of the population agrees with some of these critical doctrines. Doctrines, for example, that affirm that those of "privilege" have been educated in the ways of systemic oppression from the time they were young are used to justify the conviction of innocent people on the grounds that their skin is the wrong color, they are the wrong gender, they "identify" with the gender they were given at birth, or that their religion is a little too close to orthodox Christianity. Social justice condemns men for the sins of their ancestors, and shall convict men of the crimes attributed to whatever particular bubble of the intersectional bathwater is most conveniently assigned to the defendant. No hearing is necessary, no trial is needed, and no due process is required to convict someone of being a "racist bigot", provided you know that they said "all lives matter" on a Facebook post 3 years ago and their skin doesn't have enough melanin in it. 

Under social justice, there is no forgiveness of sins: there is either perpetual reparation, or death. Such was the end of other societies which adopted social justice as their founding principles. Usually, the term "Marxism" is used instead of "Social Justice" to denote these principles.

Social Justice, also known as Marxism, is a direct threat to the message and implications of the Gospel of Jesus, in that it misassigns blame, condemning "oppressors" on the vice of their "privledge" inherited because of their race, their skin color, or their wealth, and acquitting the "oppressed" on the virtue of their "victimhood".